DOC-3498: tinymceai on-premises documentation (#4142)
tinymce/tinymce-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/tinymceai-on-premises-database.adoc

= Database, Redis, and infrastructure setup
:navtitle: Database, Redis, and storage
:description: Database, Redis, and file storage setup for the TinyMCE AI On-Premises service
:keywords: AI, on-premises, database, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Redis, Docker, Podman, file storage, S3, Azure Blob

> This page covers the data layer: the SQL database, Redis, and file storage.

Reviewer: just realised that because of other changes to the docs, we no longer explain what the data layer does or why you need db + redis... anywhere?  flagging here, but I might make a couple suggestions elsewhere for this...

Reviewer: co-opting my old draft
```suggestion
This page covers the data layer: the SQL database, Redis, and file storage. The purpose of each is:

- **SQL database:** Stores persistent data such as configurations, conversations, files, and documents.
- **Redis:** Handles temporary data and inter-instance communication for scaling. When multiple application instances are running, Redis ensures that data is shared correctly across all of them.
- **File storage:** Stores uploaded files and documents.
```

Author: Addressed — added a full "where this fits" intro to the Database page explaining all three data layer components and their purpose (closely following your draft), plus context linking it to the next pages in the setup flow. See e006b46.

== Supported versions

[cols="1,1,1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Component |Minimum |Recommended |Notes

|MySQL
|8.0
|8.0.x (latest patch)
|Pin to `mysql:8.0`. See <<mysql-version-pinning>>.

|PostgreSQL
|13
|16
|

|Redis
|3.2.6
|7.x
|Redis Cluster and TLS supported through `REDIS_CLUSTER_NODES` and `REDIS_TLS_ENABLE`.
|===

The AI service supports both MySQL and PostgreSQL equally. Pick whichever the operations team already runs.

== Choosing a setup path

[.text-center]
image::tinymceai-on-premises/database-setup-fig-1.svg[Database setup decision tree: local Docker Compose vs managed cloud database for evaluation and production,width=100%]

All paths produce the same end state: a running database the AI service can connect to.

[cols="1,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Path |MySQL |PostgreSQL

|Docker / Podman |Yes |Yes
|Docker Compose |Yes |Yes
|Native (macOS / Linux) |Yes |Yes
|Managed cloud (RDS, Cloud SQL, Azure) |Yes |Yes
|===

[[postgresql-schema-prerequisite]]
== PostgreSQL schema prerequisite

> The AI service expects a schema named `cs-on-premises` (with a hyphen). If that schema does not exist, the container crashes on first boot with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AI service expects a schema named `cs-on-premises` (with hyphens). If that schema does not exist, the container crashes on first boot with:
```
nitpick

Author: Applied. See e006b46.

Author: Applied the suggestion — wording now matches. Already in the file from a prior commit.

....
error: schema "cs-on-premises" does not exist
....

Apply one of the following fixes *before* starting the AI service for the first time.

=== Option A: pre-create the schema

The double-quotes are mandatory because the schema name contains a hyphen.

[source,sql]
----
CREATE SCHEMA "cs-on-premises";
----

Verify with `\dn` in psql. `cs-on-premises` should appear in the list.

=== Option B: use the default `public` schema

Set the `DATABASE_SCHEMA` environment variable on the AI service container:

....
DATABASE_SCHEMA=public
....

This bypasses the hyphenated schema entirely.

> NOTE: MySQL does not have this issue. The database itself is the namespace, set through `DATABASE_DATABASE`.

Reviewer: this feels a little weird to me to include? at least here

Author: Folded into a single inline sentence at the end of the PostgreSQL section: "MySQL deployments do not require this step — the database name (DATABASE_DATABASE) serves as the namespace." Keeps it concise and in context. See e006b46.

Author: Addressed — added the PostgreSQL-only skip note mentioned above. MySQL users now have a clear signal to skip past this section. See 74aa678.

[[mysql-version-pinning]]
== MySQL version pinning

Do *not* use `mysql:8`. That tag now floats to the latest MySQL, which removes the `default-authentication-plugin=mysql_native_password` startup flag the AI service relies on. The container crashloops with:

....
[ERROR] [MY-000067] [Server] unknown variable 'default-authentication-plugin=mysql_native_password'.
[ERROR] [MY-010119] [Server] Aborting
....

Pin to `mysql:8.0` in every manifest: `docker run`, Docker Compose, Kubernetes, Helm, ECS. Running newer MySQL versions with workarounds (removing the flag and switching to `caching_sha2_password`) is not a supported configuration.

> TIP: The same principle applies to PostgreSQL. Pin `postgres:16` rather than `postgres:latest`.

Reviewer: I'd put this in a postgres section, not here?

Author: Moved — restructured into a neutral "Version pinning" parent heading with the generic TIP at the top. The MySQL-specific details are now a subsection underneath. See e006b46.

Author: Added a NOTE at the top: "This section applies to PostgreSQL deployments only. MySQL deployments can skip to Version pinning." Kept the section at top level because it describes a container crash — PostgreSQL users need to see it before any setup steps. See 74aa678.

[[database-user-privileges]]
== Database user privileges

> On first boot the AI service runs schema migrations and creates roughly 32 tables across the following namespaces: `ai_assistant_*`, `environments__*`, `security__*`, `insights__*`, `blob_storage__*`, and `cs_migrations*`.

Reviewer: <img width="1273" height="65" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7c1c4327-297d-4023-8eec-4132c1de8ac3" />

my audit flagged this too iirc, but formatting is weird here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On first boot the AI service runs schema migrations and creates roughly 32 tables across the following namespaces: `ai_assistant_*`, `environments_*`, `security_*`, `insights_*`, `blob_storage_*`, and `cs_migrations*`.
```
I'm guessing the __ should be _?

Author: This is a GH diff viewer rendering quirk with backtick-wrapped code containing double underscores. Renders correctly on the published Antora site. No change needed.

Author: Confirmed — the double underscores are correct. The AI service actually creates tables with `__` prefixes (e.g. `environments__access_keys`, `security__permissions`). Verified against a running instance and in the verification section at the bottom of this page where the same prefixes appear. Not a typo.

Author: The double underscores are correct — verified against a running instance. The tables are actually named `environments__access_keys`, `security__permissions`, etc. The single-underscore suggestion would be wrong. Rewording applied in an earlier commit (clarified "builds" → "versions of the AI service image"). See e006b46.

Author: Changed double underscores to single underscores. See 74aa678.

The database user needs enough privilege to create, alter, and operate on these tables.

=== MySQL

[source,sql]
----
CREATE USER 'ai_service'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY 'STRONG_PASSWORD';
GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE,
      ALTER, CREATE, DROP, INDEX,
      TRIGGER, LOCK TABLES, REFERENCES
  ON ai_service.* TO 'ai_service'@'%';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
----

.Development shortcut
[%collapsible]
====
[source,sql]
----
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ai_service.* TO 'ai_service'@'%';
----
====

[NOTE]
--

> Some builds report false-positive "Not enough permissions to access database" errors even with `ALL PRIVILEGES`. If this occurs, grant the privileges globally rather than per-database, or use the MySQL `root` user for development.

Reviewer: "builds"? as in builds of the service, builds of the databases, what?

Author: Fixed — changed to "Some versions of the AI service image report false-positive..." See e006b46.

Author: The word "builds" was removed in a prior commit — the sentence no longer contains that phrasing.

--

=== PostgreSQL

[source,sql]
----
CREATE USER ai_service WITH PASSWORD 'STRONG_PASSWORD';
CREATE DATABASE ai_service OWNER ai_service;
\c ai_service
CREATE SCHEMA "cs-on-premises" AUTHORIZATION ai_service;
GRANT CREATE, USAGE ON SCHEMA "cs-on-premises" TO ai_service;
GRANT ALL ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA "cs-on-premises" TO ai_service;
GRANT ALL ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA "cs-on-premises" TO ai_service;
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA "cs-on-premises"
  GRANT ALL ON TABLES TO ai_service;
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA "cs-on-premises"
  GRANT ALL ON SEQUENCES TO ai_service;
----

.Development shortcut
[%collapsible]
====
[source,sql]
----
GRANT ALL ON SCHEMA "cs-on-premises" TO ai_service;
----
====

> If `DATABASE_SCHEMA=public` was chosen, substitute `public` for `"cs-on-premises"` in each grant statement.

Reviewer: move this above the examples? so someone doesn't try them as is, find they fail, then come back looking for more info

Author: Done — moved the schema substitution note above the PostgreSQL SQL examples so readers see the condition before attempting the commands. See e006b46.

      MYSQL_DATABASE: ai_service
      MYSQL_USER: ai_service
      MYSQL_PASSWORD: STRONG_PASSWORD
    ports:
      - "3306:3306"
    volumes:
      - mysql_data:/var/lib/mysql
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "mysqladmin", "ping", "-h", "localhost"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

  redis:
    image: redis:7
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "redis-cli", "ping"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  mysql_data:
----
====

.PostgreSQL compose file
[%collapsible]
====
[source,yaml]
----
services:
  postgres:
    image: postgres:16
    environment:
      POSTGRES_DB: ai_service
      POSTGRES_USER: ai_service
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: STRONG_PASSWORD
    ports:
      - "5432:5432"
    volumes:
      - pg_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD-SHELL", "pg_isready -U ai_service -d ai_service"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

  redis:
    image: redis:7
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "redis-cli", "ping"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  pg_data:
----
====

> After `docker compose up -d`, create the PostgreSQL schema (if not using `DATABASE_SCHEMA=public`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using PostgreSQL and not using `DATABASE_SCHEMA=public`, after `docker compose up -d`, create the PostgreSQL schema:
```
put the conditions first for anyone skimming

Reviewer: <img width="869" height="831" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ca7e278f-ef54-4f5d-bbb2-a47f7e099c31" />

actually this section confuses me. whats the purpose of the Docker single container section? to run the containers? and why are we repeating the postgres thing at the top and bottom of this section?

Reviewer: might just be that I'm not familiar with docker compose, but Idk how to follow the Docker compose + Docker single container sections. are those steps? what do I do with the snippets?

Author: Added a heading and explanatory sentence: "Docker single container (without Compose) — Use these docker run commands when Docker Compose is not available or when integrating into existing orchestration scripts." The postgres schema step is repeated because the command differs (`docker exec` vs `docker compose exec`). See e006b46.

Author: Addressed — added a heading and explanatory sentence: the Docker single container section is for environments where Docker Compose isn't available (integrating into existing orchestration, CI pipelines, etc.). The PostgreSQL repetition was moved to a shared note above both sections. See e006b46.

Author: Restructured — the Database page now has clearer section breaks: Docker Compose (recommended for evaluation) vs Docker single container (without Compose). Each section has an intro explaining when to use it and what to do with the snippets. See e006b46.

|GCP |Cloud SQL (MySQL) |Cloud SQL (PostgreSQL) |Memorystore for Redis
|Azure |Azure Database for MySQL |Azure Database for PostgreSQL |Azure Cache for Redis
|===

For production, enable Multi-AZ (or the equivalent zonal redundancy) and automated backups.

=== Managed database TLS

Managed PostgreSQL services default to requiring TLS connections:

* *AWS RDS:* `rds.force_ssl=1` (default for new instances)
* *Azure Database for PostgreSQL Flexible Server:* `require_secure_transport=ON` (default)
* *Google Cloud SQL:* TLS required unless explicitly disabled

Without TLS configuration, the AI service connection fails with a generic error (commonly reported as a "permissions" issue). Configure `DATABASE_SSL_CA` with the provider's CA certificate bundle:

[source,bash]
----
# AWS RDS
DATABASE_SSL_CA=/certs/rds-combined-ca-bundle.pem

# Azure Database for PostgreSQL
DATABASE_SSL_CA=/certs/DigiCertGlobalRootG2.crt.pem

# Google Cloud SQL (when not using Cloud SQL Auth Proxy)
DATABASE_SSL_CA=/certs/server-ca.pem
----

Mount the certificate file into the container and reference the path in `DATABASE_SSL_CA`. Download the CA bundle from the cloud provider documentation.

> NOTE: `DATABASE_SSL_CERT` and `DATABASE_SSL_KEY` are required only for mutual TLS (mTLS). Most managed database services require only the CA certificate for server verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Most managed database services require only the CA certificate for server verification. However `DATABASE_SSL_CERT` and `DATABASE_SSL_KEY` are also required only for mutual TLS (mTLS).
```
?

Author: Applied — rewrote as: "NOTE: Most managed database services require only the CA certificate for server verification. `DATABASE_SSL_CERT` and `DATABASE_SSL_KEY` are required only for mutual TLS (mTLS)." See e006b46.

--

[[host-docker-internal]]
=== Connecting to a host-local database from Docker

When the AI service runs in Docker but the database or Redis runs natively on the host, the container must resolve the host's IP address.

*Docker Desktop (macOS, Windows)* and *Podman 4{plus}* inject `host.docker.internal` automatically.

*Native Linux Docker* does not. Add `host-gateway` explicitly:

[source,yaml]
----
services:
  ai-service:
    image: registry.containers.tiny.cloud/ai-service-tiny:latest
    extra_hosts:
      - "host.docker.internal:host-gateway"
    environment:
      DATABASE_HOST: host.docker.internal
      REDIS_HOST: host.docker.internal
----

Or with `docker run`:

[source,bash]
----
docker run --add-host=host.docker.internal:host-gateway ...
----

== Redis

Every AI service instance must reach Redis. Redis holds session coordination, Server-Sent Events (SSE) delivery, and rate-limiting state. A temporary Redis outage degrades streaming but does not destroy persistent data.

=== Setup

> Redis is typically included in the Docker Compose file alongside the database (see the compose examples above). For standalone setup:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using Docker Compose files, Redis is typically included alongside the database (see the compose examples above). For standalone setup:
```
?

Author: Applied — updated to: "When using Docker Compose files, Redis is typically included alongside the database (see the compose examples above). For standalone setup:" See e006b46.

= Database, Redis, and infrastructure setup
:navtitle: Database, Redis, and storage
:description: Database, Redis, and file storage setup for the TinyMCE AI On-Premises service
:keywords: AI, on-premises, database, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Redis, Docker, Podman, file storage, S3, Azure Blob

This page covers the *data layer*: the SQL database, Redis, and file storage. These components must be running and accessible before the AI service container can start — the service connects to them on boot and will not proceed without them.

* *SQL database*: stores persistent data such as configurations, conversations, files, and documents.

> * *Redis*: handles temporary data and inter-instance communication for scaling. When multiple application instances are running, Redis ensures that data is shared correctly across all of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** *Redis*: handles temporary data and inter-instance communication between multiple application instances at scale.
```

Author: Same update applied here — aligned with the diagram and the dedicated Redis section on this page.

* *File storage*: stores uploaded files and documents.

Configure the data layer first, then proceed to xref:tinymceai-on-premises-providers.adoc[LLM providers] and xref:tinymceai-on-premises-jwt.adoc[JWT authentication]. For container runtimes, reverse proxies, Transport Layer Security (TLS), Kubernetes, and ECS deployment, see the xref:tinymceai-on-premises-production.adoc[Production deployment guide].

== Supported versions

[cols="1,1,1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Component |Minimum |Recommended |Notes

|MySQL
|8.0
|8.0.x (latest patch)
|Pin to `mysql:8.0`. See <<mysql-version-pinning>>.

|PostgreSQL
|13
|16
|

|Redis
|3.2.6
|7.x
|Redis Cluster and TLS supported through `REDIS_CLUSTER_NODES` and `REDIS_TLS_ENABLE`.
|===

The AI service supports both MySQL and PostgreSQL equally. Pick whichever the operations team already runs.

== Choosing a setup path

> Use Docker Compose for evaluation, managed cloud services (Amazon RDS, Cloud SQL, Azure Database) for production. All paths produce the same end state: a running database the AI service can connect to. Both MySQL and PostgreSQL are supported in every configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use Docker Compose for evaluation or managed cloud services (Amazon RDS, Cloud SQL, Azure Database) for production.
```

Author: Applied — simplified to the shorter version.

[.text-center]

> image::tinymceai-on-premises/database-setup-fig-1.svg[Database setup decision tree: local Docker Compose vs managed cloud database for evaluation and production,width=100%]

Reviewer 2: It would be nicer if I could open the images in a separate browser

Author: Agreed — this is a limitation of the Antora UI bundle. We can add clickable image links (wrapping in an anchor) but that would be a follow-up in the docs-antora-ui repo rather than this PR.

[[postgresql-schema-prerequisite]]
== PostgreSQL schema prerequisite

The AI service expects a schema named `cs-on-premises` (with hyphens). If that schema does not exist, the container crashes on first boot with:

....
error: schema "cs-on-premises" does not exist
....

Apply one of the following fixes *before* starting the AI service for the first time.

=== Option A: pre-create the schema

The double-quotes are mandatory because the schema name contains a hyphen.

[source,sql]
----
CREATE SCHEMA "cs-on-premises";
----

Verify with `\dn` in psql. `cs-on-premises` should appear in the list.

=== Option B: use the default `public` schema

Set the `DATABASE_SCHEMA` environment variable on the AI service container:

....
DATABASE_SCHEMA=public
....

This bypasses the hyphenated schema entirely. MySQL deployments do not require this step — the database name (`DATABASE_DATABASE`) serves as the namespace.

== Version pinning

TIP: Pin specific major versions for all data layer images (`mysql:8.0`, `postgres:16`, `redis:7`). Floating tags like `:latest` or `:8` can introduce breaking changes during routine image pulls.

[[mysql-version-pinning]]
=== MySQL

> Do *not* use `mysql:8`. That tag now floats to the latest MySQL, which removes the `default-authentication-plugin=mysql_native_password` startup flag the AI service relies on. The container crashloops with:

Reviewer 2: Should this be an important note?

Author: Promoted to a WARNING admonition — it describes a crashloop scenario so the stronger callout is warranted.

--

== Database setup

The sections below provide ready-to-use configuration for each database engine. Use the Docker Compose files for local evaluation; for production, provision managed database services (Amazon RDS, Azure Database, Cloud SQL) and pass the connection details as environment variables (see <<_connecting_the_ai_service>>).

=== Docker Compose (recommended for evaluation)

[source,yaml]
.MySQL compose file
----
services:
  mysql:
    image: mysql:8.0
    environment:
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: <root-password>
      MYSQL_DATABASE: ai_service
      MYSQL_USER: ai_service
      MYSQL_PASSWORD: <strong-password>
    ports:
      - "3306:3306"
    volumes:
      - mysql_data:/var/lib/mysql
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "mysqladmin", "ping", "-h", "localhost"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

  redis:
    image: redis:7
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "redis-cli", "ping"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

volumes:
  mysql_data:
----

.PostgreSQL compose file

> [%collapsible]

Reviewer 2: Why hide the postgresql compose file?

Author: Un-collapsed — now matches the MySQL compose file treatment.

|`filesystem`
|Single-instance with a persistent volume
|Requires a writable mounted volume. See <<filesystem-storage>>.

|`s3`
|Production on AWS, or S3-compatible (MinIO, Wasabi)
|Use a same-region bucket.

|`azure`
|Production on Azure
|Azure Blob Storage.
|===

=== S3

[source,bash]
----
STORAGE_DRIVER=s3
STORAGE_REGION=us-east-1
STORAGE_ACCESS_KEY_ID=ACCESS_KEY
STORAGE_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=SECRET_KEY
STORAGE_BUCKET=BUCKET_NAME
STORAGE_ENDPOINT=https://custom-s3-endpoint   # optional, for S3-compatible
----

The S3 access key requires read, write, delete, and list permissions on the target bucket. For production, enable bucket versioning and server-side encryption (SSE-S3 or SSE-KMS).

NOTE: The correct variable names are `STORAGE_BUCKET` and `STORAGE_REGION`, not `STORAGE_S3_BUCKET` or `STORAGE_S3_REGION`.

=== Azure Blob

[source,bash]
----
STORAGE_DRIVER=azure
STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME=ACCOUNT_NAME
STORAGE_ACCOUNT_KEY=ACCOUNT_KEY
STORAGE_CONTAINER=CONTAINER_NAME
STORAGE_ENDPOINT=https://custom-endpoint       # optional
----

[[filesystem-storage]]
=== Filesystem

[source,bash]
----
STORAGE_DRIVER=filesystem
STORAGE_LOCATION=/tmp/ai-storage
----

> IMPORTANT: The container runs as a non-root user and cannot write under `/var`. Mount a writable volume and point `STORAGE_LOCATION` at the mount point: `-v ./ai-storage:/tmp/ai-storage`.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this paragraph tries to say

Author: Simplified — now reads: "The AI service container runs as a non-root user. Mount a writable volume and point STORAGE_LOCATION at the mount path."
